Mitral valve disease in dogs, why you should act now


Did you know that one of the most common heart problems in dogs 
is a condition called degenerative mitral valve disease?

If your dog has been identified as having a heart murmur, 
and is already an adult, 
its very likely this is the cause. 

It outnumbers all other cardiac conditions in dogs 
by at least 3 to 1, 
probably more.

The good news is, 
with the right care and treatment, 
many dogs can live happy and comfortable lives 
for years after diagnosis. 

However – 
did you also know that some of the biggest benefits 
can be achieved early on in the disease? 
Even if your dog seems healthy still, 
there may be potential problems brewing 
and you may be missing an important preventative opportunity.

This is definitely one condition where its best to act fast. 
So stay tuned to find out more about why this is the case, 
and why you should make sure your dog 
is properly diagnosed and staged.

To understand this point best 
we need to look at the causes of the disease, 
and also most importantly the stages of the disease. 

Understanding the progression 
helps a lot with understanding the treatment. 

I’ll also cover what you as an owner can do to help 
your dog at each step. 

Finally we’ve got some top tips as well 
on what to monitor and watch out for with this disease.

 
What is DMVD? 

The left ventricle is the powerhouse of the heart. 
It pushes blood all the way around the body at high pressure 
– its literally what creates your systolic blood pressure. 
You can see it contracting here in this animation, 
and the valves open and close to ensure the blood flow is one way only. 

The mitral valve is the key valve in the heart 
that stops the blood flowing the wrong way, 
and makes it go the right way. 

You can see it here opening and shutting like a little door. 

This little flap of tissue is being slammed shut 
by systolic blood pressure every single heart beat, 
about 120 000 times a day, 
on average in a typical dog.

That’s a huge amount of stress 
for a structure only a few mm thick 
and so its not surprising that some wear and tear 
can start to build up over time.

In fact, I think its pretty incredible 
how long these valves can last. 
Artificial valves really struggle to perform as well, 
even ones made of metal.

In degenerative mitral valve disease, 
that valve becomes thickened and leaky. 

We see something called myxomatous change. 

This involves breakdown of the strong connective tissues 
of the valve structure, 
specifically the fibrous layer in the valve 
that provides the structure and framework. 

In addition strange accumulations of things 
called glycosaminoglycans occur in the valve. 
These are fascinating sugar based molecules 
that the body likes to use as shock absorbers, 
for example in places like joints. 

They are kind of like a gel that helps fill spaces between cells. 

However their build up in the valve makes things too weak and floppy.

This process also occurs in the chordae tendineae 
– which are strands of tissue that hold the valves 
in place like parachute cords.

Instead of closing tightly, 
it starts to sag backwards when closing under pressure, 
Like an overstretched elastic band, 
and allow leaks of blood.


But why does this happen?

We really don’t have all the answers for this. 
We know it is largely genetic in origin, 
with it running in families and breeds of dogs very predictably. 

Small breeds like Cavaliers, Dachshunds, and Chihuahuas 
are especially prone to this condition. 

But I see it occasionally in all breeds of dogs.

I think there is a good analogy with arthritis. 
Just as arthritis is a degeneration of the joint tissue, 
that seems somewhat inevitable with age, 
there is a huge variation between individuals as to what 
age it first appears, 
and how rapidly things degenerate over time.


The ACVIM Stages
So we have a progression of disease gradually worsening, 
from clinically insignificant to eventually life threatening. 

To help understand this process 
cardiologists have identified 4 key stages dogs go through. 
We call them B1, B2, C and D 
based on the ACVIM classification scheme
ACVIM is the American College of Veterinary Internal Medicine, 
and their scheme is now accepted to be the most useful 

To understand them best, 
I think it helps to understand the way things typically 
progress with this disease.

It’s the story of a pump 
that is dropping in efficiency 
more and more as time goes on.

1.	At the start – stage B1 - 
the amount of blood leaking backwards 
is fairly minimal. 

The heart is very adaptable 
and has a lot of reserve capacity, 
particularly in dogs. 

So the ventricle just contracts 
a little bit harder to compensate for the leak, 
there’s no problem and no outward sign of illness. 
BUT – this small leak of blood 
will still be very fast and turbulent. 
Remember its trying to hold back systolic blood pressure. 
So the sound of the leak is very significant, 
causing a heart murmur. 

2.	Now sadly the valve usually gets a little worse and worse
 as time goes on, 
until eventually the ability of the muscle to compensate 
with a bit more squeezing power is exhausted


3.	So now we enter stage B2. 
Now the heart starts to get bigger. 
This is a common adaptation seen when the heart 
is put under strain. 
Hearts can get bigger for lots of reasons, 
even athletic training. 

However here we have a big problem, 
because the heart in getting bigger 
starts to stretch the ring of tissue that holds the valve in place. 
We call this the valve annulus. 
So the heart enlargement directly worsens 
the leak through the valve.

4.	So we end up in a vicious cycle 
of worsening heart enlargement 
(which we call cardiomegaly) 
and increased leak through the valve due to stretch. 
The ilncreased leak causes a bigger heart 
causes more stetch and more leak. 
As you can see if this carries on, without intervention, This isn’t going to end well.


5.	Finally this gets so bad 
that the heart can’t cope anymore, 
and starts reducing in effectiveness. 

Its pumping action is failing 
– this is termed heart failure 
- and the pressure builds up behind it. 

This ‘back pressure’ then eventually causes 
the symptoms that we see, 
usually fluid starting to leak out 
into the air spaces in the lung. 
Finally-  we have reached stage C. 

Cardiologists call this ‘congestive heart failure’ 
or CHF for short, 
and it is potentially life threatening. 

6.	Hopefully your pet is now treated with diuretics, 
which helps to reverse this problem. 
These diuretics control the back pressure 
and fluid accumulation. 
So as the valve continues to worsen in effectiveness
 the tendency for back pressure and fluid accumulation goes up, 
and the dose of diuretic needed goes up.

7.	So finally we reach stage D, 
refractory heart failure. 
This is the time for high doses of diuretics 
and potentially various other drugs. 
Some dogs can do surprisingly well still at this point, 
but it is variable and quality of life is often compromised. 
Tough decisions may need to be made.


So as a recap:

Stage B1 – Early, silent changes


In stage B1, your vet might hear a heart murmur,
 but the heart itself is still normal size and doing its job well. 
At this point, medication doesn’t help. 
The best thing you can do is monitor your dog 
and support their overall health. 

Some vets, myself included, 
recommend adding an omega-3 supplement like fish oil, 
which is good for general heart health.
 
Stage B2 – Time to act

In stage B2, 
the heart starts to stretch and enlarge. 
This is a turning point. 
Your dog may look and act completely normal, 
but now medication can really make a difference. 
The most important drug at this stage is called Pimobendan. 
Research shows it can delay the onset of heart failure 
by over a year on average 
— giving your dog more time with good quality of life.
 
Stage C – Symptoms appear


Stage C is when symptoms begin. 
The most common sign is breathlessness, 
because fluid builds up in the lungs. 
Your dog may cough, tire more easily, 
or breathe faster when resting. 

The good news? This stage is very treatable. 
Diuretics like furosemide work quickly to clear the fluid, 
and many dogs go back to feeling much better.

One of the best tools you have at home 
is counting your dog’s sleeping respiratory rate 
— that’s how many breaths they take per minute when resting. 
If it starts creeping up, 
it may be an early sign that fluid is building up, 
and you should check in with your vet. 

This simple habit can help catch problems early a
nd keep your dog safer.
 

Stage D – Advanced disease

Stage D is the most advanced stage, 
when standard medications are no longer enough.
 At this point, higher doses, 
different combinations of drugs, 
and sometimes newer procedures may be tried 
to keep your dog comfortable. Every case is different,
 and your vet or cardiologist will help guide 
the best options for your pet.
 

Stages B1 and B2 are usually diagnosed with an echocardiogram, 
or ultrasound of the heart. 
X-rays can sometimes help, 
but they’re less accurate. 
Stage C can often be confirmed with imaging, 
but again, that simple home test 
— counting your dog’s sleeping breathing rate 
— is one of the most powerful tools you have as an owner.


So why is it important to act fast?

We now have a useful treatment that can be used in the preclinical phase of the disease, stage B2. 
Pimobendan seems to have an amazing effect on the heart, 
helping to slow 
or even temporarily reverse 
the increase in size that tends to occur. 

By breaking the vicious cycle 
of increased remodelling and increased valve leakage 
we can delay the onset of congestive heart failure by a lot,
 on average by over a year.

But how do we know when to give it? 
Dogs with B1 disease and B2 disease will outwardly seem the same.
As far as we can tell, their murmurs are very similar also.
So auscultation by a vet doesn't seem to help.

Currently only an echo can tell the difference 
between a B1 heart that is coping, 
and a B2 heart that isn’t coping. 

So if your dog has a heart murmur, 
do you know what stage of disease it has? 
And is it on the right medication?

Paradoxically, 
the later stages of the disease are much easier to monitor 
without resorting to the echo.So it makes sense to do the echo early on.
So while I know that echos can be expensive, 
there is the possibility of giving your dog an extra year of good quality 
pre-symptomatic life at stake. 

Thats a huge benefit your dog might lose out on if you wait.

New tools in future might hopefully come along to help here. 
I would love to see AI enabled stethoscopes, 
and maybe activity trackers perhaps, 
all helping to try to sort out which dogs need echo’s and which don’t. 
But at the moment, its all down to the echo.

 


Degenerative mitral valve disease 
can sound scary, but remember 
— many dogs live happily for years after diagnosis 
with the right care. 
The key is knowing the stage, 
following your vet’s advice, 
and monitoring at home. 

If your dog has been diagnosed with a murmur, 
talk to your vet about whether it’s time for further testing, 
and what stage they may be in. 
If in doubt, an echo should be considered 
because there is a lot at stake here by acting sooner rather than later.

By working together, 
we can give our dogs the longest and happiest life possible.
