	1.	Introduction
	◦	Briefly explain what CHF is in simple terms: fluid buildup due to a weak or failing heart.
	◦	Set an empathetic tone — this is a scary topic, but there's hope.
	2.	What Causes CHF in Pets?
	◦	Explain mitral valve disease in dogs, cardiomyopathies in cats.
	◦	Mention age, breed, or genetic predispositions.
	3.	Key Signs of CHF to Watch For
	◦	Rapid breathing (especially at rest or during sleep)
	◦	Coughing
	◦	Reduced appetite or energy
	◦	Fainting/collapse
	◦	Enlarged abdomen or difficulty breathing
	4.	Diagnosis: What to Expect at the Vet
	◦	Chest X-rays, heart ultrasound (echo), ECG
	◦	Blood tests for other causes
	5.	Treatment Options
	◦	Common medications (e.g., furosemide, pimobendan, ACE inhibitors)
	◦	Oxygen support for emergencies
	◦	Importance of consistent monitoring (including SRR)
	6.	Monitoring at Home: What You Can Do
	◦	Track Sleeping Respiratory Rate (SRR)
	◦	Watch for subtle changes in behavior
	◦	Keep a medication log or use an app (e.g., Cardalis)
	7.	Prognosis & Quality of Life
	◦	Average survival times (frame with sensitivity)
	◦	Many pets live good lives for months or years with treatment
	◦	Emphasize comfort, not just time
	8.	When to Worry — Emergency Signs
	◦	SRR > 40
	◦	Gasping, open-mouth breathing
	◦	Severe lethargy, collapse
	9.	Final Thoughts & Emotional Support
	◦	Reassure owners that they’re not alone
	◦	Encourage open communication with their vet
	◦	Mention VetCardioHub as a supportive resource
 
 
 
What is congestive heart failure and what does it mean for your pet? what can you do to help your pet? And what mistakes do people typically make in trying to help?  Heart failure is a scary sounding term. You never want to hear it applied to your beloved cat or dog. It’s a term that fills everyone with anxiety and makes it sound as though maybe this could be the end of the road.  However really in most cases this couldn’t be further from the case. I seriously dislike the term “heart failure” for this reason, as it’s very misleading.  And so Here I want to explain more about this concerning and misunderstood condition and why there is lots of hope still for treatment. If you take action and watch the right things, you can significantly change the outcome.  As a veterinary cardiologist, I’ve treated hundreds of dogs with heart failure myself and have seen most of them go on to live good-quality lives - despite the diagnosis. But there’s a lot you need to know to get things right, and some big mistakes people sometimes make. So Stay tuned to the end for these.  We will also look at what causes it, how it’s diagnosed, how it’s treated, and what to watch out for in an emergency.  So what is CHF?  Congestive heart failure is what happens in the body when the heart is getting too weak or inefficient.  The heart is simply a pump, and if it isn’t pumping enough blood, things go wrong.  This pumping failure can happen on the left side, the right side, or even happen on both sides at the same time.  Remember the heart is still working and pumping when heart failure occurs, just not quite actively enough.  This is very different from the heart stopping completely, which can happen with some arrhythmias and is of course much more dramatic and life threatening.  So In veterinary cardiology, we use the term “congestive heart failure” to describe a very specific situation, occurring as a result of this pumping failure.  it describes a point where the body simply starts to retain too much salt in the kidneys, - and as a consequence of this - water is also retained. In effect, there’s just too much blood. Properly described as circulating volume. It’s an odd concept.  exercise intolerance - a term meaning slowing up on exercise and getting out of breath more easily - often is an early sign of impending problems in humans,  But - we rarely see this in dogs and cats. This is mainly because they are naturally more athletic than us, but also because they tend to hide this aspect from us - and of course we can’t ask them directly…  As a result of this water retention we start to see serious problems. In left sided heart failure, it usually causes fluid to build up in the lungs. This flooding of the lungs is super dangerous, and will result in faster breathing. This is why I recommend monitoring the sleeping respiratory rate so much  If the right side of the heart fails, we typically see the fluid accumulating in the body cavities like the abdomen, so a swollen abdomen full of fluid is a typical sign of this.  Typical symptoms: So as a result, the typical symptoms of CHF are: Rapid difficult breathing (especially at rest or during sleep) Coughing Reduced appetite or energy Reduced exercise tolerance Fainting/collapse Enlarged abdomen  However it is the rapid breathing that is the most reliable sign and so we monitor closely for this with the SRR measured at home.  So what causes CHF? Congestive heart failure is the end result of many different processes going wrong in the heart. In dogs, the most common cause by far is degenerative mitral valve disease, with other diseases such as dilated cardiomyopathy and congenital cardiac diseases being much rarer, with many other very rare causes too. In cats hypertrophic cardiomyopathy and other related cardiomyopathies are by far the most common causes.  Diagnostics So how do we diagnose heart failure? your vet will sometimes suspect congestive heart failure based on the presenting symptoms and the examination findings.  But they may sometimes need to do additional tests such as: - X-rays (which are actually one of the best quick tests to check the lungs for fluid accumulation). However, it’s not always easy to keep your pet still and settled to get radiographs if they are struggling to breathe  - An echocardiogram - Or heart scan - is a fantastic test, but not always available due to constraints on the equipment and skill of the operator. You can see my other video on what’s involved in an echo if you want to know more. Sometimes in an emergency a vet will also ultrasound the lungs. Sometimes it’s called a FAST scan - and originally developed in the emergency room to check for trauma signs. This can show if there is fluid present in the lungs. Although fluid in the lungs isn’t specific for heart failure…  - And finally Blood tests - which can detect cardiac biomarkers, like probnp, and also screen for other conditions)  Treatment The most important thing to stress is that congestive heart failure is treatable in most cases, especially in the early stages. It is possible to reverse this accumulation of excess fluid in the lungs and other parts of the body using drugs - called diuretics.  First line treatment In the first line, vets typically use a drug called frusemide, but sometimes a more potent one called torasemide is also used. These are diuretics, and will clear fluid from the spaces it shouldn’t be.  Diuretics are drugs that interfere with the way the kidneys concentrate the urine. Instead the urine comes out super dilute and watery. So effectively they reduce the salt and water retention that has caused the trouble in the first place.  You are likely to see your pet wanting to drink more as a result, and needing to urinate more often too. Don’t worry, this is completely normal, and you may even find they need a night time wee also.  It’s very important not to let your pet become dehydrated while receiving diuretics, as they will loose circulating volume much quicker than normal in these cases. Otherwise, as long as your pet has healthy kidneys, diuretics are very safe drugs especially in dogs. Cats do need a more cautious approach, as they have kidneys more prone to problems, But still diuretics are lifesavers for all species suffering from congestive heart failure.   Also, back to initial stabilisation, the vet may need to give them oxygen therapy, which is a big help when the lungs are half full of fluid to make sure the blood still gets the supplies it needs. Oxygen is usually only needed for a short while, to let the diuretics start to do their work  They may even use a pulse oximeter, the red light probe that can measure oxygen saturation in the blood stream. It’s used a lot on people usually placed on the finger. However – these are quite unreliable on most animals This is due to the hair - and skin pigmentation - which exist on most pet’s extremities.  In addition to diuretics your vet will probably use some other medications, such as: - pimobendan – a medication that helps the heart beat more powerfully, and is now the most important medication in dogs for treating most heart conditions. It’s much rarer to use in cats…  - and also ACE inhibitors – these are drugs that reduce the kidneys feedback system which is what drives the retention of fluid in the first place  Successful treatment is not guaranteed – it depends on many factors especially how severely ill your pet’s heart is, but also how early the problem is detected.  In later stages of CHF, all sorts of therapies are being tried, such as:  - Additional diuretic classes, like the thiazide diuretics, as well as using torasemide over furosemide  - Newer drugs, like SGLT2 inhibitors which have shown great results in human congestive heart failure so far  - Potassium supplementation - really helpful on high diuretic doses  - Injectable diuretics - sometimes an injection really does work much better than a tablet  - then we have Interventions - eg TEER which is a little clip that Is placed between the mitral valve leaflets and the crazy sounding atrial septal puncture procedure, where they deliberately make a hole in the wall between the left and right atrium. It then can act as a pressure relief valve and help reduce the left atrial pressure  - and of course we have Surgery - eg Mitral valve repair, which is a mainstay of treatment in humans and can be done in dogs now at several centres. But we are talking about open heart surgery here which is no simple matter.  Monitoring at Home: What You Can Do Once your pet is under treatment there is a huge amount you can do. It’s A real game changer for your pet if you can keep an eye on the right things and make the right adjustments over the course of the disease.  - No 1 - Track the Sleeping Respiratory Rate (SRR) Not only is the SRR useful for detecting CHF in the first place, it can be super useful to monitor progress and treatment effectiveness.  Over time, diuretics tend to become less and less effective at controlling the CHF, but usually higher doses can work wonders, so getting the dose right and increasing it at the right moments is essential.  The Sleeping respiratory rate provides us with one of the best tools to do this, and you can do it at home for free whenever you feel like it.  - No 2 - Watch for subtle changes in behavior  Lots of other things can change as heart failure symptoms ebb and flow. People with the condition experience many subtle symptoms like fatigue, weakness, lack of energy, dizziness, confusion, fluctuating appetites and difficulty sleeping. Our pets can’t really describe any of these feelings to us but you may get an idea that maybe they just aren’t feeling right from watching their behaviour closely.  - No 3 - Keep a medication log or use an app (e.g., Cardalis) There can be a lot of medications to keep track of with congestive heart failure, the more advanced it is the more pills you maybe expected to administer  Keeping a log of drugs, doses and symptoms can be super useful, as memory can play tricks on us all sometime This is particularly important when there is more than one person involved in the pet’s care.  Also over time changes might be made multiple times to a diuretic dose, so having an idea of what is working best can be hard to keep track of without a written record.  Prognosis & Quality of Life It’s really a challenging topic to address the prognosis of congestive heart failure. It can’t be denied it is a real concern and can affect your pet’s quality and length of life severely sometimes.  However – other dogs sometimes go on for a long time with minimal problems. Ultimately, the underlying cause of the heart failure is the number one factor that affects the prognosis.  For example, dogs with degenerative valve disease do much better typically than dogs with dilated cardiomyopathy.  When it comes to degenerative valvular disease, studies usually suggest a mean survival time of something between 6-14 months.  Although this information needs to be considered as very approximate as there is a huge potential range of outcomes and some pets do live for multiple years on treatment.  Of course, The mean survival time figure is just the AVERAGE. The RANGE is much more relevant, and studies often report crazy things, like 3-800 day ranges ( for example one looking at advanced heart failure cases only)!  The most important thing of course is that your pet remain as comfortable and healthy for however long they have left, and this is usually possible by getting the medication and monitoring right.   Getting the diuretic dose right It’s very important to ensure the diuretic dose is increased appropriately, as the disease progresses.  Studies have shown that dogs with advanced congestive heart failure seem to live much longer when given much higher doses of diuretic than those that aren’t. So why don’t more dogs get the higher doses?  Maybe this represents excessive worry amongst vets about using high doses, or perhaps they or the owners are giving up a bit too soon. Its hard to know. But in my experience, with a willingness to push the diuretics up at the right times, I expect a mean survival way above 6 months after initial diagnosis.  In my opinion, it’s always worth discussing with your vet or cardiologist about whether you should try a higher dose of diuretic if things aren’t looking right.  When to Worry — Emergency Signs So what should you watch out for, and when might you need to contact your vet in an emergency?  If you see any of these signs, you should get emergency advice about your pet: - A sleeping respiratory rate > 40 - that isn’t settling  - Gasping, or open-mouth breathing, or a very marked chest movement with each breath  - Or Severe lethargy, weakness, or collapse  Mistakes sometimes made This is a tricky section, but there’s a lot of misconceptions and misinformation held both by vets and pet owners when it comes to heart failure. Here are some of the biggest issues and mistakes I see in practice:  1. Coughing is not necessarily a sign of heart failure. Many dogs do cough a little more as the heart gets bigger and heart failure approaches. But it’s not a very reliable sign  2. A heart murmur doesn’t equal heart failure In fact heart murmurs can be really innocent, or associated with minor disease, and sometimes exist for years before heart failure appears But they usually should be investigated regardless  3. Not increasing the diuretics dose. Many vets hate to use diuretics at higher than the initial doses But going higher is a lifesaver as things progress We have huge success using torasemide over furosemide in late stage congestive heart failure  And a note for those in the US, for some reason it’s called torsemide there. While we are on that Furosemide and frusemide are also used to mean the same drug in different locations. Of course there are lots of different brand names as well for these, some of which are human medications and some developed specially for pets - and hopefully easier to give  4. And for number 4 I think a lot of the time fluid accumulation is assumed to be due to heart problems, especially in the lungs. However it can be due to other things, especially pneumonia and haemorrhage As pneumonia also causes coughing and respiratory distress, it can be very difficult to separate it from heart failure without performing an echo  Final Thoughts & Emotional Support Don’t worry, congestive heart failure can feel overwhelming, but with the right approach and treatment planning it can usually be managed for a decent length of time.  These are my tips for doing your best and keeping your pet as healthy as possible:  Maintain contact with your vet for advice and guidance. - lots of changes happen during the progression of heart failure, so expect to need to make many adjustments along the way   Consider getting a veterinary cardiologist’s input as well. - expert advice can be a big help in managing these situations  Monitor treatment effectiveness with SRR and logs - again to help guide changes over time  Don’t hesitate to increase diuretics (under guidance) - Based on the advice you are getting and monitoring you are doing  And If the SRR goes over 40, act fast—contact your vet or emergency clinic urgently   If you found this helpful take a look at some of our other videos, especially the one that goes into sleeping respiratory rate in more depth. Which you can see here.  And please help me to reach more pet owners, and to continue the channel, by subscribing.
