Understanding Heart Murmurs in Cats
 
Introduction

Has your vet heard a murmur in your cat? 
Are you wondering what it might mean? 
Is it serious? 
And Should you be worried?
 
Maybe  your cat seems completely healthy – 
and you had no idea there was anything wrong!
 
Heart murmurs in cats can be very confusing. 
As a veterinary cardiologist of 20 years experience 
I’ve been involved in these discussions many times. 
 
So lets have a look at why a murmur in a cat 
should always prompt further investigation
 
But don’t worry just yet, 
the good news is that quite often your cat 
might remain healthy despite the murmur. 
It depends on the underlying cause,
And a diagnosis is key.
 
 
Today, I’ll break down what heart murmurs are, 
what causes them, 
and what you should do if your pet has one!
Cat’s are a bit more complex than dogs, 
So to cover everything this video is longer than average,
But feel free to use the chapter markers to get to the bits 
You are most interested in…




Part 1 – What is a Heart Murmur?   
So lets start by having a look at what  a heart murmur actually is. 
It’s a turbulent flow of blood, happening inside the heart. 
What does that mean? 
Well, any fluid in motion can transition from laminar, 
or smooth flow, 
into turbulent flow. 
 
I like the anaology of a river. 
Have you even looked at a large river 
- flowing past often at great speed and volume 
- and noticed how completely silent it is? 
that huge volume of flow is moving so quietly. 
It’s quite remarkable.
 
However as soon as it reaches a constriction 
or narrowing 
like a bridge or rapids, 
suddenly it can become really loud, and roaring. 
This, is turbulence – or turbulent flow. 
And it makes noise.
 
The physics of this are pretty complex, 
but basically there are rapid and irregular 
pressure and velocity changes happening 
constantly within the turbulent flow 
which are generating sound waves.
 
In the same way, a heart murmur is caused by 
turbulent blood flow in the heart. 
Anything that affects the smooth flowing of the blood 
through each of the 4 cardiac chambers 
and valves and great vessels 
will result in a chaotic or swirling motion in the blood 
and this changes the flow from silent  
- to noisy.
 
So - heart murmur is an abnormal sound that we hear 
when listening to your cat's heart with a stethoscope. 
Normally, a cat’s heart sounds like a steady ‘lub-dub, lub-dub.’ 
But with a murmur, we hear a whooshing or swishing sound."
 
Lets listen to an example.
 
Don’t worry if you struggle with that –
Cat’s heart rates are very fast
Especially at the vets
So hearing a murmur in a cat’s heart takes a lot of practice. 
 



Part 2 – What Causes Heart Murmurs?  
So there are lots of reasons that you can get a heart murmur. 
 
 
Some are innocent murmurs, 
which means they’re harmless and sometimes found in kittens. 
It’s thought to be due to the high flow speed of the blood 
As it passes through the tiny growing and fast beating heart
They usually go away as the kitten grows. 
 
Other times we can see flow murmurs in cat hearts, 
caused by flow becoming turbulent 
in different areas without signs of disease 
– especially the outflow tracts, 
on both the left and right
 
However, murmurs can also be caused by underlying heart disease,:
 
One possibility is a Congenital heart defect: 
Some cats can be born with abnormal heart structures. 
So not all kittens with murmurs should be assumed 
to have an innocent murmur. 
Especially if it is loud, or doesn’t go away.
 
 
 
And Heart muscle disease: 
Cats are very prone to heart muscle disease, 
in particular hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. 
This is the leading cause of murmurs in cats over 6 months of age. 
More on this later.
 
Also there are Leaky heart valves: 
While this is super common in dogs, 
cats almost never get leaks in their heart valves with age. 
It is occasionally seen though as an aging change, 
and infections can cause leaks too. 
More commonly leaky valves can be something they’re born with, 
as a congenital defect.
 
 
Other conditions: 
Things like anemia or infections can also contribute.
 
Grading murmurs:
Your vet might have also mentioned 
a grade or level when they heard the murmur. 
This is an estimation of the loudness of the murmur, 
usually on a scale of 1 to 6, 
and in general a low grade murmur is 
much less worrying than a high grade murmur. 
It can be tempting to get a bit caught up in grading, 
especially when looking for changes over time, 
but most studies suggest its quite unreliable 
as it doesn’t match well between different clinicians, 
and doesn’t actually correlate well with the disease severity.
In cats this is especially true, as the typical murmurs we hear
Are often dynamic murmurs which can come and go 
and vary with heart rate and myocardial stress.
Sometimes they will come,
And sometimes they will go. 
Even if the underlying disease stays the same
So monitoring murmurs 
especially their loudness 
is quite unrewarding in cats
 
Part 3 - Hypertrophic Cardiomyopathy
 
So hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, or HCM, 
is the most common cause of a murmur in cats. 
 
But what is it?
HCM is a thickening of the heart muscle
It happens gradually over time, 
and is triggered by genetic mutations in the 
muscle proteins that control the contraction and relaxation
of the heart muscle.
This is occurring deep down, 
in the molecular machinery of the heart.
And is a defect repeated millions of times 
across all the muscle cells.
But, its not just one defect we are looking for.
There are probably thousands of different ones,
All leading, eventually, to the same problem. 
Of heart muscle thickening.
 
So this muscle thickening makes the heart stiff and inelastic.
So it can’t fill up properly. 
 
Part 4 – Dynamic murmurs
 
So why do we get a murmur with HCM? 
And what is a dynamic murmur?
 
 a dynamic murmur is a tricky thing to understand.
But it is the cause of most murmurs in cats.
If you’re cat has not had a murmur from a very young age,
If the murmur seems to have just ‘appeared’
They very likely have a dynamic murmur, 
which are due to outflow tract obstruction
And this is usually linked to HCM
 
Lets have a look at a heart animation to understand what’s going on
 
Here we can see a normal heart, and we can zoom in on the 
Left ventricular outflow tract. 
This is the exit point of the left ventricle. 
The left ventricle is the powerhouse of the heart,
And we have a high flow of blood exiting through this narrow gap.
 
Any thickening of the heart muscle in this area can constrict this area 
and make the blood struggle to get through. 
This causes the turbulence I mentioned earlier.
 
So we get a whooshing noise with every squeeze of the heart.
It is called dynamic, because the narrowing becomes ever more 
Extreme during the squeeze. 
And also tends to be worse the faster the heart goes.
It’s also sometimes seen on the right side of the heart
Usually not due to HCM though.
 
You can see here why not all HCM cats get murmurs.
The thickening of the heart muscle can be very variable.
Sometimes it is at the apex of the heart,
And sometimes in the area around the outflow – the septum.
Only if the thickening is in the septum will the murmur happen.
 
If we look at the animation again, 
here is a heart with apical thickening only. 
The heart muscle might be very stiff and unhappy. 
But if there is no obstruction at the outflow, 
there is no murmur.
 
The opposite is also possible. 
Some cats have thickening only at the outflow 
and so they can have quite loud murmurs, 
with no serious impact on the rest of their heart.
 
So it’s a huge diagnostic challenge. 
Many cats with heart murmurs may have minimal disease
And many cats with severe disease might have no murmur.
 
Part 5 – Diagnosing Heart Murmurs 
 
So how do we know which cats to investigate further?
 
It is a huge diagnostic challenge.
 
First, auscultation 
– or listening with a stethoscope 
– is step one.

Sometimes the murmur is clear, 
sometimes it comes and goes. Here is an example


In addition, the vet might also heart something called a gallop rhythm. 
Which sounds like this.



And finally, an arrhythmia can also be a clue 
that something isn’t right.

Typically It will sound like this:


Any of these should prompt further investigation, 
even if your cat seems perfectly healthy. 
In fact, a gallop rhythm or arrhythmia 
are probably more likely to be associated with problems 
than a murmur.
 
 
Usually, An echocardiogram, 
which is an ultrasound of the heart, 
is the best way to see how well the heart is functioning 
and find the cause of this murmur. 

We get to see the thickness of the wall, 
and whether the heart is struggling yet 
or still doing fine.

In skilled hands, 
and with the right equipment, 
this is by far the best test.

You can watch our other video on echocardiograms, 
if you want to know more.  
 
However, in many areas of the world, 
echos are expensive 
or require a lot of travel to get to a suitable cardiologist.
 
In that case a pro-BNP blood test is sometimes a cheap option 
and is quite a good way to help judge if an echo is worth performing. 
A negative result here is quite a good predictor that the disease is mild.
But a positive result should mean that an echo is performed.
 
 
 
Chest X-rays can also be used, 
to check the heart’s size and lung health
But with HCM the thickening usually happens inwardly, not outwardly. 
And xrays only show a silhouette



Finally, An ECG might be suggested
– usually best if your vet suspects any rhythm disturbances
like that arrhythmia we just heard
 
Of course, its really important to use your own vet’s guidance on this one, 
as there are so many different possible situations that can apply. 
 
My favourite starting point, 
nearly every time though, is an echo. 
The echocardiogram provides so much more information 
than any other test, on the right machine and in the right hands, 
its fantastic.. 
 
In fact an expert echo is able to give a cardiologist 
a view of every chamber of the heart moving dynamically 
and to assess the speed and flow characteristics 
through every valve and vessel. 
It assesses cardiac function in all chambers. 
It measures the size of the heart in all sorts of ways. 
And it can  assess if any of the valves are leaking 
– which is known as regurgitation. 
Or narrowed – which is known as stenosis.
 
So remember, not all murmurs are life-threatening, 
but early detection is key to managing heart health!
 
 
 
Part 6: Symptoms:
So what symptoms might you see of this condition?
 Cats will often show no signs of problems at all.
This is partly because the condition can be silent 
But also because cats hide symptoms well.
 
Subtle signs you may see in some cats, 
Are stopping suddenly while exercising,
Or open mouth breathing.
 
But sometimes HCM causes serious health problems, 
Like congestive heart failure
Which is where the lungs can start to fill with fluid
And your cat will show problems with their breathing.
This is why watching and counting your cat’s breathing 
is very important
As it can give an early warning sign of impending problems.
 
Another serious problem seen is thromboembolus, or stroke.
Cat’s can form blood clots inside their hearts, 
And these clots can break off and get into the 
Systemic circulatory system
causing serious issues, 
usually blocking blood flow to the back legs
and making your cat paralysed. 
This is rarely survivable for your cat, 
So we try to reduce the risk of this happening by using anticlotting drugs
Which can help to prevent the clots from forming in the first place
But only if we know about it.
 
Finally, we believe HCM is a leading cause of sudden death in cats.
Most of the time sudden death is not diagnosed though, 
so this is debated still by cardiologists.
.
 
 
 
 
 
Part 7 – Treatment and Management
 
Treatment for heart murmurs depends on the cause. 
 
Many murmurs need no treatment at all, 
while others may require medication to support heart function 
or prevent blood clot formation, such as:
 
 
- Diuretics: These help reduce fluid buildup in the lungs. 
But they’re only needed when the heart is really struggling, 
in a situation known as congestive heart failure. 
Sometimes these can get used a little too early.


- Then there is Anti-clotting medication, 
such as clopridogrel, rivaroxaban and aspirin. 
These are very important to use to prevent a clot before it happens…

- And Beta blockers – 
which can help reduce dynamic obstructive disease, 
but only seem helpful in certain situations.

- And finally ACE inhibitors:
These are used infrequently nowdays, 
but can help To ease blood flow in the circulation 
and reduce remodelling tendancies.
 
Sadly though, 
there are no preventative medications
 for most feline heart conditions currently with proven benefit,
especially HCM. 

There is currently some interest in one known as rapamycin,
Or felicyn,
Which we are watching closely and have a separate video on, 
linked here.
Also mavacamten is another drug 
being investigated for benefits in humans 
Affected by HCM.
 
So Its important to stress, 
that while we can’t prevent HCM,
we have been finding an increasing number of ways 
we can help cats
 by bringing in medication in the pre-clinical 
– or asymptomatic – phase. 
So this is why its usually worth getting a murmur investigated 
before you see any changes in your cats health. 
Getting the diagnosis right is ever more important, 
and usually needs a proper investigation rather than guesswork.
 



Part 8 – What Can You Do as a Pet Owner? 
 
If your cat has been diagnosed with a heart murmur, 
don’t panic! 
 
You can download our action plan using the link below 
To help get on track.
 
These are the main steps:
 
- Follow your vet’s advice on diagnosis and monitoring. 
In particular try to get an echocardiogram performed 
by someone with expertise in this area. 
It is very tricky diagnosing and staging cats, 
and needs good quality scan equipment

So see a cardiologist if possible.

Keep up with regular check-ups and heart screenings.
Make regular recordings of the sleeping respiratory rate
Have a look at our video on how to do this here
Its simple, free and very effective.
Make note of any changes in energy levels.
Ensure your cat maintains a healthy weight and diet.
 
By staying proactive, 
you can help your cat live a happy and healthy life! 
And remember, 
regular check-ups,  
and sometimes repeats echos, 
are crucial to monitor any changes over time!
 

CONCLUSION – Call to Action   
 
Heart murmurs can sound scary, but with the right care, 
many cats can lead normal lives. 
 
Remember these key things about cats and their murmurs:
1.    A murmur is not a diagnosis, 
it’s a diagnostic clue that should prompt further investigation

2.    Murmurs are not at all correlated with disease severity in cats.

Some cats have loud murmurs and minimal disease
While others can have severe disease and no murmur at all
 
Get a scan or a proBNP blood test as the next steps 
to make sure your cat is not at risk.
 
Thanks so much for watching. 
We’re trying to reach more cat owners 
who want to know how to help their cats, 
so please consider hitting the like and subscribe buttons 
which will help boost their reach. 
 
Also, feel free to drop a comment below 
if you have any questions about your cat’s heart health
 
