The rise of the corporate vet clinic.
Why are vet fees so expensive?
 
Did you know that over half ( 60%) of UK vet practices 
are now owned by large corporate groups? 
— this is up from only 10% in 2013 – 
and pretty much zero per cent in 2000.
 
We are seeing this same trend across pretty much every country, 
the US, Canada, Australia, New Zealand and Europe.
 
It’s a cause of much debate and concern. 
Why is your local clinic now owned by a corporate chain, 
rather than being managed by an independent vet 
living amongst the community they serve? 
Healthcare is now being driven by business interests, 
rather than care and compassion. 
And this surely changes the incentives and care that is provided. 
It’s a matter of trust, ultimately.
 
As a result of multiple complaints, 
the UK has set the Competition and Markets Authority, 
known as the CMA, to investigate the issue directly. 
 
As of Autum 2025 they have published their initial findings, 
and a set of recommendations. 
But what did they find, and did they go far enough?
 
A headline concern is pricing. 
These rose an average of 63% from 2016 to 2023 
meanwhile general services inflation was 32%
This sounds extortionate.
 
So what makes vet care so expensive, 
and are the corporate vets overcharging you for your pet’s care?
 So today, I’ll explain what this all means for you as a pet owner 
— how it could affect the care, choice, and costs for your dog or cat.
 
And while this video is responding to concerns raised in the UK, 
these same issues seem to be playing out all over the world right now 
and the concerns and tactics are much the same everywhere.
 



Section 1 — What’s Going On?  

The rise of the corporate vet practice, in the UK at least, was begun in 1999. 

The Veterinary Surgeons Act of 1966 is still in force today, 
but was written for a very different era 
- when vets were self-employed working from their home or car 
with minimal need for expensive business premises or equipment 
and a very different world of pharmaceuticals. 

The UK law was amended in 1999 
to allow non-veterinarians to own vet practices.
But at first, not a lot changed. 
Slowly, a trickle began to turn into a flood, 
as different business models were tried. 

However, the era of private equity and cheap money around 2010 to 2020 
was the real game changer. 
Large veterinary groups appeared in greater numbers
and started paying huge amounts 
to acquire local independent clinics and consolidate them together.
And also started buying each other, 
until only the big 6 are now left.

 So The CMA 
— which is the UK regulator that protects consumers from unfair markets — 
started looking into the veterinary sector in 2023 
after thousands of complaints from UK pet owners.
 
Usually the CMA investigations are boring and ignored.
However this one certainly caused a stir. 
It had a completely unprecedented numbers of responses, 
including 45000 individual pet owners 
all feeling frustrated enough by the current situation 
and wanting to take the opportunity to make their voices heard.
 As of October 2025 they’ve now released a set of findings 
suggesting there are real concerns about how big vet groups 
may be shaping the market.






Section 2 — Key Concerns Identified  
 The CMA found three main issues: 1️ Transparency: 
Owners often don’t know who actually owns their local vet. 
Many practices have been bought by the same few large companies 
— but keep their original, 
independent-sounding names. 
Very little is changed at front of house, 
but back of house management structures 
and fee structures 
become very different.
 2️ Pricing: 
In some areas, 
there’s now limited competition 
with whole cities full of different sounding veterinary clinics,
all owned by the same Large Veterinary Ground.
This might mean higher fees 
or mark-ups on medicines.
It’s not really the CMA’s responsibility to decide what fees should be.
The key factor is lack of competition, 
which leads over time to fatter profits for clinic owners 
and worse deal for pet owners.
For example, the CMA found that prescription mark-ups can vary massively.
 3️ Regulation: 
The current vet legislation in the UK dates back to the 1960s, 
and it mainly regulates individual vets 
 not the corporations behind them. 
This reflected an era when all vets were self employed, 
Not part of corporate giants,
And that means the system hasn’t really caught up with modern business models.





Section 3 — What They have suggested
 
So no big surprise, 
it was found that vets owned by large veterinary groups 
seem to charge higher prices on average 
than independent practices.
 
The CMA thinks that profit margins seem to be higher 
than would be expected, if competition was working well.
 
And that for most of the large veterinary groups 
the acquisition process of taking over an independent practice, 
led to significantly higher prices 
than the trend would suggest should be expected.
 
The CMA has advised 
that pet owners are left in the dark about ownership models 
and what a fair price should be.
 
So to try to address these issues 
they have recommended some basic measures are undertaken:


1. They are asking vet practices to publish a comprehensive price list. 
The details seem to be slightly vague currently 
and clearly this is not going to be as simple for some products as others. 
Even vaccinations will vary in what is actually given, 
and when it comes to diagnostics and surgery 
not all items will be like for like comparisons for sure.
More on this later.


2.  Set up an online comparison site for these prices. 
To allow pet owners to compare clinics. 
Potentially this is a good idea 
but the practicality may be especially hard for small clinics to comply with 
as they won’t be able to automate such a process in the same way 
large veterinary groups will.
In the same way that price comparison websites incentivise a rush to the bottom in quality of things like insurance policies, the same is possible here. 


3. Make it clear about ownership. 
Its not clear how this will be done either 
– but more transparency is definitely needed.

4. Make it necessary to provide an estimate of costs 
for all procedures over £500. 
This should be standard practice anyway, 
and you should always make sure you ask for one.
However - these will never be completely accurate and exact 
due to the complex nature of diagnosis and medical treatment
that is rarely possible to predict exactly in advance.


5. Make it easier to ask for a prescription to buy medications online. 
Again this is currently a legal obligation for vets to provide anyway, but some sort of increased awareness of the availability of online prescriptions seems good.


6.        Have a clear complaints process. 
This seems pretty self-evident. 
Although again probably more of a concern in small clinics 
rather than corporates.


7.        And they suggest an overhaul of the regulatory framework 
to bring veterinary clinics under control of the UK veterinary regulator
 – the RCVS

As we mentioned before, it dates back 60 years!





Section 4 — What This Means for You  (Visual: owner in vet waiting room, friendly vet interaction)
 So what does this mean if you’re bringing your dog or cat in for a check-up?
 First — this isn’t about blaming vets. 
Most vets, whether in independent or corporate practices, 
just want to do their best for your pets.
 
And most want to give the best care they can for the most reasonable cost possible, within the constraints of the business model they operate in.
 
In fact I know from 2 decades in this industry 
it can be exhausting, 
challenging and emotionally draining work, 
trying to balance all of these concerns. 
creating huge problems of burnout and dissatisfaction in the many amazing professionals working in these clinics.
 But the business side can influence how clinics are run 
— what services are offered, 
how consultations are priced, 
and how medicines are dispensed.
 You might find clinics promoting care plans, 
memberships, or diagnostic bundles 
— which can be great value if they suit your pet’s needs. 
But it’s also worth asking questions.
 
For now the recommendations from the CMA 
will take time to be confirmed and put into place. 
But you can do most of the steps yourself already.
 



Section 5 — How to Stay Informed 
 Stay informed when visiting your vet clinic. 

When choosing your vet 
make sure you know if it’s a large chain 
or independent small practice. 

This can be hard to track down, 
currently there may just be a tiny line at the footer of the webpage, 
or a small notice somewhere hidden away in the waiting room wall displays
.
 
Whatever you personally believe 
and there are definitely pros and cons for both models
– I think it’s important to at least know what your practice is up to.
 
Personally my advice is that the best thing to do 
is to ask the reception team direct. 
Either on the phone or right there are the desk. 
Don’t be accusing or critical, 
but see what they think about their own ownership structure.
 
I consider it a warning sign if the reception staff 
are not happy about the question, or about the clinic owners. 
If the clinic is part of a large veterinary group but the staff are happy, 
this is a positive sign.
 
The next things to consider is whether to be part of a healthcare plan. 
The CMA did a detailed analysis on these, 
as they have been promoted hugely by corporate chains.
 
Interestingly they found they are actually reasonably good value, 
if you were planning to use all of these 
vaccinations and preventative treatments anyway. 
They published data from a large veterinary group
 that about 85% of pet owners 
do experience cost savings by being part of the plan. 
Depending on the uptake of services offered in the plan.
 
Although, this is assuming you were going to buy 
all these preventative treatments direct from the practice. 
The truth is, if you buy these from an online pharmacy ‘on prescription’ 
instead of direct from your vets, 
the cost savings do tend to disappear completely.
 
But also the issue is that these days 
not all pets are at high risk of the parasites and diseases 
that are being prevented by these care plans. 
So to achieve optimum health you may not need all of the ‘care plan’ items.

 
So it is best to get a personalised opinion 
from a trusted vet about what vaccinations 
and preventative treatments are advisable in that local area 
and for your pet’s lifestyle.
 
Finally, when your pet needs treatment, you can politely ask:

- ‘Can I get a written estimate for this treatment?’ 
   as we mentioned this is a key recommendation published by the CMA, 
but to be honest I have always done these for my clients 
and find it surprising this is a finding that needs addressing. 
It's always good to ask, 
and you can hopefully discuss with the vet where any uncertainties may lie.


- Remember some things are much easier to predict than others. 
A full diagnostic work up 
can sometimes involve a step by step progression from one test to another, 
and it is impossible to know which way it will go from the outset.

- Are there any alternatives I should know about? 
And should we do all the tests in one go or do them step by step?

Diagnosis is often a bit more efficient and cheaper 
by waiting for the results of each test to come back 
and then deciding what other tests should be done next, 
based on the likelihood of different disease probabilities. 

Each test done 
will change the probability 
of the differential diagnosis list 
and influence which tests 
are going to be most useful to do next.

But this can be slow and inefficient 
especially if some tests have a long turnaround time. 

You are paying for your vet’s expertise in judging what is best,
And to help you navigate this difficult path, 
so make sure you trust them.
But make sure they know what your priority is.

- Also ask - 
"Can I have a prescription to buy the medicine elsewhere if I choose?"
The answer is usually yes - in the UK at least its a legal requirement, 
but there are some exceptions, 
especially in the more unusual drugs 
that may need special import or special formulation. 
Also this only usually applies to veterinary drugs – and not human drugs.
 
These are all fair, reasonable questions 
— and your vet shouldn’t mind them.

In fact, by discussing these things, 
you will quickly get an idea of whether they are confident and justified 
in their recommendations.
 



Section 6 — Price comparison

The final one is more controversial – price comparison.
 
This should still be something to consider, but be aware that this is a really difficult thing to do when it comes to complex services, and I have my own concerns about this idea of a price comparison website.
 
For example, my area of veterinary cardiology provides a great example. 
An echocardiogram is a scan of the heart. But there is currently no published recommended guideline or structure of what this should involve.
Most vets will have access to a basic ultrasound machine, and can find the heart with it.
But some machines can cost the equivalent of £80,000 (or $100,000), while others can be 10 or 20 times cheaper.
And some vets will have spent years doing additional training in echo, while others might have just watched someone else do one once.
 
And the time involved in a full echocardiographic exam of every chamber, valve and flow velocity, along with full measurements and reporting, can be 60 minutes. While others might spend 1 minute to look at one thing.
 
So how do you provide just one price for all these different levels of ‘echo’? It’s going to be misleading – at best – and open to abuse and dishonesty at worst.



Section 7 — How It Connects to Pet Heart Health  
 As someone who works in veterinary cardiology, 
I see how important trust and transparency are 
— especially when your dog has a condition 
like a heart murmur or heart failure.
 
Most vets - in the UK at least – 

Are employees and get absolutely no incentive or benefit 
to do anything that brings in more money for the clinic.

 So they are usually recommending tests and procedures
 purely in the best interest of your pet and you. 
The only way to be sure, if in doubt, 
is to get a second opinion. 
 
There needs to be a strong sense of trust 
with the vet that you take your pet to. 
You need to be able to know they are suggesting 
the best options for your pet. 
But you also need to discuss with them 
if there are cheaper options available 
that might be nearly as good, or just as good, 
so you can make an informed choice. 

For example, buying medication online 
rather than through your vet, 
is a great way to get excellent cost savings 
without compromising their care.
 Understanding what you’re paying for, 
why certain tests or medications are needed, 
and who is guiding those decisions makes a huge difference.



Closing 
 So yes — big vet chains are changing pet care, 
it seems this is inevitable.
Whatever your opinions might be.
 
The CMA hasn’t suggested any measures 
that would radically change any of this.

none of the measures they have proposed so far 
will adversely affect large veterinary groups.
 
In fact most of its measures are probably 
going to hurt and cost independent practices more than corporates. 
So hopefully implementation is fair 
and doesn’t distort the market yet further.
 
The key is being informed, asking questions,
 and building a good relationship with your vet team in a collaborative manner. 
 
 
If you found this helpful, 
and support our attempts to inform and educate pet parents
for the best outcome for all our pets
please give it a like and subscribe.
It helps raise our profile and reach more people.

If your pet has any heart concerns, take a look at our other videos which tackle all the relevant concerns
 And if your dog has a heart murmur, 
grab my free Dog Murmur Action Plan — the link’s in the description 
— it’ll help you understand your dog’s stage and what to do next.


 
